Documentation for Binary Quantization Support with KNN Vector Search (#8281)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization.md

```r
1.1*((8 / 8 * 64 + 24) * 1000000  + 100 * (2^8 * 4 * 256 + 4 * 512 * 256))  ~= 0.171 GB
```
## Binary Quantization

Starting with the version 2.17, OpenSearch supports Binary Quantization (BQ) with binary vector support from the Faiss engine. Binary quantization compresses vectors into a binary format (0s and 1s), making it highly efficient in terms of memory usage. You can choose to represent each vector dimension using 1, 2, or 4 bits, depending on the precision you want. One of the advantages of using Binary Quantization (BQ) is that the training process is handled automatically during indexing. This means that no separate training step is required, unlike other quantization techniques such as Product Quantization (PQ).

### Using Binary quantization
To use Binary Quantization in your k-NN vector index, you can configure it with minimal effort. Below is an example of how you can define a k-NN vector field that utilizes Binary Quantization with the Faiss engine. This configuration provides an out-of-the-box setup with 1-bit binary quantization, using the default values for ef_search and ef_construction set to 100:
```json
PUT my-vector-index
{

>   "mappings": {

Reviewer: I dont think we need to include these on-disk/compression examples - just use the low level interface

Author: IMO , I was thinking as user , When I go to Quantization Page , I know how to configure and what defaults are there , so I feel we should keep to have all information at one place.

```json
PUT my-vector-index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 8,
        "space_type": "l2",
        "data_type": "float",
        "mode": "on-disk",
        "compression_level": "16x",  // Can also be 8x or 32x
        "method": {
            "params": {
                "ef_construction": 16
            }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
To futher fine tune the configuration , below is an example of how to define it with specific parameters of ef_construction , encoder and number of bits.

```json
PUT my-vector-index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 8,
        "method": {
            "name": "hnsw",
            "engine": "faiss",
            "space_type": "l2",
            "params": {
              "m": 16,
              "ef_construction": 512,
              "encoder": {
                "name": "binary",
                "parameters": {
                  "bits": 1  // Can be 1, 2, or 4
                }
              }
            }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> ### Basic Search with k-NN and Binary Quantization

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Search using binary quantized vectors
```

> You can perform a basic k-NN search on your index using a vector and specifying the number of nearest neighbors (k) to return:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can perform a k-NN search on your index by providing a vector and specifying the number of nearest neighbors (k) to return:

```

```json
GET my-vector-index/_search
{
  "size": 2,
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "vector": [1.5, 5.5, 1.5, 5.5, 1.5, 5.5, 1.5, 5.5],
        "k": 10
      }
    }
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

````

> You can also fine-tune the search process by adjusting the ef_search and oversample_factor parameters. Here's an example of how to do this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also fine-tune search by providing the `ef_search` and `oversample_factor` parameters
```

> - **`oversample_factor`**: This parameter controls the factor by which the search process oversamples the candidate vectors before ranking them. A higher oversample factor means more candidates will be considered before ranking, improving accuracy but also increasing search time. Essentially, it helps trade-off between accuracy and efficiency. For example, setting the `oversample_factor` to `2.0` will double the number of candidates considered during the ranking phase, which may help achieve better results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `oversample_factor` parameter controls the factor by which the search oversamples the candidate vectors before ranking them. A higher oversample factor means more candidates will be considered before ranking, improving accuracy but also increasing search time. When selecting the `oversample_factor` value, consider the trade-off between accuracy and efficiency. For example, setting the `oversample_factor` to `2.0` will double the number of candidates considered during the ranking phase, which may help achieve better results. 

The following request specifies the `ef_search` and `oversample_factor` parameters:

```

```json
GET my-vector-index/_search
{
  "size": 2,
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "vector": [1.5, 5.5, 1.5, 5.5, 1.5, 5.5, 1.5, 5.5],
        "k": 10,
        "method_params": {
            "ef_search": 10
        },
        "rescore": {
            "oversample_factor": 10.0
        }
      }
    }
  }
}

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

````

#### HNSW memory estimation

> The memory required for the Hierarchical Navigable Small World (HNSW) graph can be estimated as `1.1 * (dimension + 8 * M)` bytes/vector, where `M` is the maximum number of bidirectional links created for each element during the construction of the graph.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The memory required for the Hierarchical Navigable Small World (HNSW) graph can be estimated as `1.1 * (dimension + 8 * m)` bytes/vector, where `m` is the maximum number of bidirectional links created for each element during the construction of the graph.
```

> As an example, assume that you have 1 million vectors with a dimension of 256 and M of 16. The memory requirement can be estimated as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an example, assume that you have 1 million vectors with a dimension of 256 and an `m` of 16. The following sections provide memory requirement estimations for various compression values.
```

> ##### 1-bit Quantization (32x Compression)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### 1-bit quantization (32x compression)
```

> In this case, each dimension is represented using 1 bit, equivalent to a 32x compression factor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In 1-bit quantization, each dimension is represented using 1 bit, equivalent to a 32x compression factor. The memory requirement can be estimated as follows:
```

```r
Memory = 1.1 * ((256 * 1 / 8) + 8 * 16) * 1,000,000
       ~= 0.176 GB
```

> ##### 2-bit Quantization (16x Compression)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

##### 2-bit quantization (16x compression)
```

> ```r

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
In 2-bit quantization, each dimension is represented using 2 bits, equivalent to a 16x compression factor. The memory requirement can be estimated as follows:

```r
````

Memory = 1.1 * ((256 * 2 / 8) + 8 * 16) * 1,000,000
       ~= 0.211 GB
```

> ##### 4-bit Quantization (8x Compression)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

##### 4-bit quantization (8x compression)

In 4-bit quantization, each dimension is represented using 4 bits, equivalent to a 8x compression factor. The memory requirement can be estimated as follows:

```

```json
PUT my-vector-index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 8,
        "space_type": "l2",
        "data_type": "float",
        "mode": "on_disk"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

To further optimize the configuration, you can specify additional parameters such as the compression level and fine-tune the search parameters. For example, you can override the `ef_construction` value or define the compression level, which corresponds to the number of bits used for quantization:

- **32x compression** for 1-bit quantization
- **16x compression** for 2-bit quantization
- **8x compression** for 4-bit quantization

This allows for greater control over memory usage and recall performance, providing flexibility to balance between precision and storage efficiency.

To specify the compression level, set the `compression_level` parameter:

```json
PUT my-vector-index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 8,
        "space_type": "l2",
        "data_type": "float",

>         "mode": "on-disk",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        "mode": "on_disk",
```

The following request specifies the `ef_search` and `oversample_factor` parameters:

```json
GET my-vector-index/_search
{
  "size": 2,
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "vector": [1.5, 5.5, 1.5, 5.5, 1.5, 5.5, 1.5, 5.5],
        "k": 10,
        "method_params": {
            "ef_search": 10
        },
        "rescore": {
            "oversample_factor": 10.0
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

#### HNSW memory estimation

The memory required for the Hierarchical Navigable Small World (HNSW) graph can be estimated as `1.1 * (dimension + 8 * m)` bytes/vector, where `m` is the maximum number of bidirectional links created for each element during the construction of the graph.

As an example, assume that you have 1 million vectors with a dimension of 256 and an `m` of 16. The following sections provide memory requirement estimations for various compression values.

> ##### 1-bit quantization (32x compression)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### 1-bit quantization (32x compression)

```

In 1-bit quantization, each dimension is represented using 1 bit, equivalent to a 32x compression factor. The memory requirement can be estimated as follows:

```r
Memory = 1.1 * ((256 * 1 / 8) + 8 * 16) * 1,000,000
       ~= 0.176 GB
```

> ##### 2-bit quantization (16x compression)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### 2-bit quantization (16x compression)

```

        "data_type": "float",
        "mode": "on_disk"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

To further optimize the configuration, you can specify additional parameters such as the compression level and fine-tune the search parameters. For example, you can override the `ef_construction` value or define the compression level, which corresponds to the number of bits used for quantization:

- **32x compression** for 1-bit quantization
- **16x compression** for 2-bit quantization
- **8x compression** for 4-bit quantization

This allows for greater control over memory usage and recall performance, providing flexibility to balance between precision and storage efficiency.

To specify the compression level, set the `compression_level` parameter:

```json
PUT my-vector-index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 8,
        "space_type": "l2",
        "data_type": "float",
        "mode": "on_disk",
        "compression_level": "16x",
        "method": {
            "params": {
                "ef_construction": 16
            }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The following example futher fine-tunes the configuration by defining `ef_construction` , `encoder` and the number of bits `bits`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

The following example futher fine-tunes the configuration by defining `ef_construction` , `encoder` and the number of bits `bits`:
```

```r
1.1*((8 / 8 * 64 + 24) * 1000000  + 100 * (2^8 * 4 * 256 + 4 * 512 * 256))  ~= 0.171 GB
```

## Binary Quantization

Starting with the version 2.17, OpenSearch supports binary quantization (BQ) with binary vector support for the Faiss engine. Binary quantization compresses vectors into a binary format (0s and 1s), making it highly efficient in terms of memory usage. You can choose to represent each vector dimension using 1, 2, or 4 bits, depending on the desired precision. One of the advantages of using binary quantization is that the training process is handled automatically during indexing. This means that no separate training step is required, unlike other quantization techniques such as product quantization.

### Using binary quantization

> To configure binary quantization for the Faiss engine, define a `knn_vector` field and specify the `mode` as `on_disk`. This configuration defaults to 1-bit binary quantization and both `ef_search` and `ef_construction` set to `100`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To configure binary quantization for the Faiss engine, define a `knn_vector` field and specify the `mode` as `on_disk`. This configuration defaults to 1-bit binary quantization and both `ef_search` and `ef_construction` set to `100`:

```

        "data_type": "float",
        "mode": "on_disk"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

To further optimize the configuration, you can specify additional parameters such as the compression level and fine-tune the search parameters. For example, you can override the `ef_construction` value or define the compression level, which corresponds to the number of bits used for quantization:

- **32x compression** for 1-bit quantization
- **16x compression** for 2-bit quantization
- **8x compression** for 4-bit quantization

This allows for greater control over memory usage and recall performance, providing flexibility to balance between precision and storage efficiency.

To specify the compression level, set the `compression_level` parameter:

```json
PUT my-vector-index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 8,
        "space_type": "l2",
        "data_type": "float",
        "mode": "on_disk",
        "compression_level": "16x",
        "method": {
            "params": {
                "ef_construction": 16
            }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The following example futher fine-tunes the configuration by defining `ef_construction` , `encoder` and the number of bits `bits`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example futher fine-tunes the configuration by defining `ef_construction` , `encoder` and the number of bits `bits` (which can be `1`, `2`, or `4`):
```

```json
PUT my-vector-index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 8,
        "method": {
            "name": "hnsw",
            "engine": "faiss",
            "space_type": "l2",
            "params": {
              "m": 16,
              "ef_construction": 512,
              "encoder": {
                "name": "binary",
                "parameters": {

>                   "bits": 1  // Can be 1, 2, or 4

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                  "bits": 1 
```

                }
              }
            }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> ### Search using binary quantized vectors

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Search using binary quantized vectors

```

```r
1.1*((8 / 8 * 64 + 24) * 1000000  + 100 * (2^8 * 4 * 256 + 4 * 512 * 256))  ~= 0.171 GB
```

> ## Binary Quantization

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Binary quantization
```

> Starting with the version 2.17, OpenSearch supports binary quantization (BQ) with binary vector support for the Faiss engine. Binary quantization compresses vectors into a binary format (0s and 1s), making it highly efficient in terms of memory usage. You can choose to represent each vector dimension using 1, 2, or 4 bits, depending on the desired precision. One of the advantages of using binary quantization is that the training process is handled automatically during indexing. This means that no separate training step is required, unlike other quantization techniques such as product quantization.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Starting with version 2.17, OpenSearch supports BQ with binary vector support for the Faiss engine. BQ compresses vectors into a binary format (0s and 1s), making it highly efficient in terms of memory usage. You can choose to represent each vector dimension using 1, 2, or 4 bits, depending on the desired precision. One of the advantages of using BQ is that the training process is handled automatically during indexing. This means that no separate training step is required, unlike other quantization techniques such as PQ.
```

> ### Using binary quantization

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Using BQ
```

> To configure binary quantization for the Faiss engine, define a `knn_vector` field and specify the `mode` as `on_disk`. This configuration defaults to 1-bit binary quantization and both `ef_search` and `ef_construction` set to `100`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To configure BQ for the Faiss engine, define a `knn_vector` field and specify the `mode` as `on_disk`. This configuration defaults to 1-bit BQ and both `ef_search` and `ef_construction` set to `100`:
```

```json
PUT my-vector-index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 8,
        "space_type": "l2",
        "data_type": "float",
        "mode": "on_disk"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> To further optimize the configuration, you can specify additional parameters such as the compression level and fine-tune the search parameters. For example, you can override the `ef_construction` value or define the compression level, which corresponds to the number of bits used for quantization:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To further optimize the configuration, you can specify additional parameters, such as the compression level, and fine-tune the search parameters. For example, you can override the `ef_construction` value or define the compression level, which corresponds to the number of bits used for quantization:
```

- **32x compression** for 1-bit quantization
- **16x compression** for 2-bit quantization
- **8x compression** for 4-bit quantization

This allows for greater control over memory usage and recall performance, providing flexibility to balance between precision and storage efficiency.

To specify the compression level, set the `compression_level` parameter:

```json
PUT my-vector-index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 8,
        "space_type": "l2",
        "data_type": "float",
        "mode": "on_disk",
        "compression_level": "16x",
        "method": {
            "params": {
                "ef_construction": 16
            }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The following example futher fine-tunes the configuration by defining `ef_construction` , `encoder` and the number of bits `bits` (which can be `1`, `2`, or `4`):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example further fine-tunes the configuration by defining `ef_construction`, `encoder`, and the number of `bits` (which can be `1`, `2`, or `4`):
```

```json
PUT my-vector-index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 8,
        "method": {
            "name": "hnsw",
            "engine": "faiss",
            "space_type": "l2",
            "params": {
              "m": 16,
              "ef_construction": 512,
              "encoder": {
                "name": "binary",
                "parameters": {
                  "bits": 1 
                }
              }
            }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Search using binary quantized vectors

You can perform a k-NN search on your index by providing a vector and specifying the number of nearest neighbors (k) to return:

```json
GET my-vector-index/_search
{
  "size": 2,
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "vector": [1.5, 5.5, 1.5, 5.5, 1.5, 5.5, 1.5, 5.5],
        "k": 10
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> You can also fine-tune search by providing the `ef_search` and `oversample_factor` parameters

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can also fine-tune search by providing the `ef_search` and `oversample_factor` parameters.
```

> The `oversample_factor` parameter controls the factor by which the search oversamples the candidate vectors before ranking them. A higher oversample factor means more candidates will be considered before ranking, improving accuracy but also increasing search time. When selecting the `oversample_factor` value, consider the trade-off between accuracy and efficiency. For example, setting the `oversample_factor` to `2.0` will double the number of candidates considered during the ranking phase, which may help achieve better results. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `oversample_factor` parameter controls the factor by which the search oversamples the candidate vectors before ranking them. Using a higher oversample factor means that more candidates will be considered before ranking, improving accuracy but also increasing search time. When selecting the `oversample_factor` value, consider the trade-off between accuracy and efficiency. For example, setting the `oversample_factor` to `2.0` will double the number of candidates considered during the ranking phase, which may help achieve better results. 
```

            "oversample_factor": 10.0
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

#### HNSW memory estimation

The memory required for the Hierarchical Navigable Small World (HNSW) graph can be estimated as `1.1 * (dimension + 8 * m)` bytes/vector, where `m` is the maximum number of bidirectional links created for each element during the construction of the graph.

As an example, assume that you have 1 million vectors with a dimension of 256 and an `m` of 16. The following sections provide memory requirement estimations for various compression values.

##### 1-bit quantization (32x compression)

In 1-bit quantization, each dimension is represented using 1 bit, equivalent to a 32x compression factor. The memory requirement can be estimated as follows:

```r
Memory = 1.1 * ((256 * 1 / 8) + 8 * 16) * 1,000,000
       ~= 0.176 GB
```

##### 2-bit quantization (16x compression)

In 2-bit quantization, each dimension is represented using 2 bits, equivalent to a 16x compression factor. The memory requirement can be estimated as follows:

```r
Memory = 1.1 * ((256 * 2 / 8) + 8 * 16) * 1,000,000
       ~= 0.211 GB
```

##### 4-bit quantization (8x compression)

> In 4-bit quantization, each dimension is represented using 4 bits, equivalent to a 8x compression factor. The memory requirement can be estimated as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In 4-bit quantization, each dimension is represented using 4 bits, equivalent to an 8x compression factor. The memory requirement can be estimated as follows:
```
